---
title: A Separation
category: ten
---
# {{page.title}}

A Separation is Iranian film director Asghar Farhadi’s 2012 Oscar winner in the category of the Best Foreign Language Film. The film follows extraordinary incidents in the lives of two families. The middle aged middle class couple Simin (Leila Hatami) and Nader (Payman Moaadi) file for a divorce and the film opens with a scene of their hearing. The opening scene is the first of challenges the film poses to the concept of binary oppositions- the lawyer asks Simin if Nader beats her, or is an addict, or if he does not provide for her, and she denies any such acts of monstrosity. She wants to move abroad for a better future for their daughter Termeh, while Nader wants to stay back and care for his ailing father who is suffering from alzheimer’s disease. The other family, distanced from Simin and Nader’s by class, includes Razieh (Sareh Bayat), Hojjat (Shahab Hosseini), and their daughter Somaiyeh. Razieh, who cares for Nader’s father as a house help after Simin leaves for her mother’s, is a devout Muslim apprehensive of committing sins, and Hojjat is her unemployed husband who has been in and out of jail in the past.

The screenplay (written by Farhadi) peels away like an onion and the audience is forced to let go of the ideas and conclusions they may have formed in due course. New revelations follow one after another, pulled through by a court battle the two families fight with Razieh and Nader accusing each other of what comes to be a series of accusations. Farhadi brings into frame exceptional choices people have to make and how a small (in)decision may lead to an endless tediousness. Termeh, burdened with the outcome of choices she did not make, tells her mother Simin thus, “If you didn’t want to leave, any of this would not have happened”. As the families battle for justice under a law that has exceptions, the very philosophy of justice blurs. There are exceptions in law because there are exceptions in life. Razieh chooses to see Nader’s father naked and dress him because he had peed in his trousers, before doing which she dials a number (must have been a religious authority) and asks if this is a sin. We see her going ahead and doing it with an exasperated, reluctant expression on her face. In Kantian philosophy, whether or not something is good (or bad) is dependent on the intent of a person. If the intent (willing) is good, the act has its unique goodness even when the result is bad. The film gives its characters, and most notably Razieh, scopes to draw on that. 

Another instance I would briefly mention is an exchange between Nader and Termeh while the latter prepares for a test:
Termeh: That’s what my teacher said.
Nader: Don’t ever say that sentence to me again. What is wrong is wrong, no matter who said
it or where it is written.
Nader’s objectivity stumbles over his imperfect reality and he is forced to succumb to subjectivity; saying, negating, adding, disclosing information to others to finally find himself caught in a labyrinth. Ending in the embodiment of justice- the court, in the place where the film begins, the viewer is left seeking answers. Termeh has to make a life changing decision while Simin and Nader wait outside, oblivious.

Cineaste spoke with Farhadi in 2011 in New York when A Separation was featured in the New York Film Festival’s 2011 edition. Rahul Hamid transcribes it in “Freedom and its Discontents: An interview with Asghar Farhadi” from which I shall quote a few lines: “When you first see a person, you form a judgment, and then what I try to is to provide little bits of information that make you alter that judgment, or deepen it, by giving or withholding information. I try to give you the information drop by drop and to create a situation where a character’s reaction to another character gives the audience information. So, I am not directly providing the information.” (Farhadi)

Farhadi has been instrumental in making Iranian cinema reach a wider audience with two Oscar winners: A Separation and The Salesman. Other Iranian directors associated with world cinema include Jafar Panahi, Abbas Kiarostami and Mohsen Makhmalbaf.
